
Design Thinking
================

### Stories

 * Worst day, Best day
 * Worst project, Best project
 * Where do you ...?:
   * Spend the most money
   * Spend most of your time
   * Spend most of your effort
   * Make the most money
 * One wish


### POV MadLib

 * **[USER] needs to [USER’S NEED] because [SURPRISING INSIGHT]**


### POINT and Co-design

*Problems, Obstacles, Insights, Needs, Themes*

 * Extract common themes
 * Pick your favorite theme and problem area
 * Explore opportunities: "How might we..."
   * "How might we collect real-time metrics?"
   * "How might we extract personalized information to promote a sale?"


### Brainstorming

Pick a few related `HMW` statements and brain storm all possible solutions.


### Drafting the idea

Select a few feasible solutions from brainstorming and loosely draft together
what a concrete solution might look like.


### Prototyping across all fidelities

Pick the most feasible solution from the drafts that addresses the most
identified needs, and build a low-fidelity prototype.  This may be a real
web-service with dummy data, a paper-prototype of the UI, anything that helps
you *validate* the solution - are we building the right thing.

Ask yourself, ["why" three times](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=1zdzivUmL4s#t=794),
this is a lightweight method for a rough validation.

Collect input from user/stakeholder feedback or system simulations.

Build a higher-fidelity prototype and repeat.


### Make it real

Take all the feedback from the prototypes and design the final system or solution.

Build it, validate it, verify it, ship it.


